[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So a common question that we
are asked is why do we appear
to tap with the negative?
So when we use our
words in tapping,
it appears as though we are
tapping with negative words.
What we are actually
doing is saying the words
that describe our
present moment,
whether that's
happening right now,
or it was something we're
thinking about from a week ago
that's still bothering us.
So when you think
about it, we're
actually stating
the truth, the truth
of what's happening for us.
But this does seem
counterintuitive
in a lot of self-help
movements and a lot
of positive affirmations
that are out there,
that, often, what
we're trying to do
is to try to think
more positively
or reframe, or think more
different about something.
That's difficult to
do sometimes when
we're still in that state of
having a negative emotion.
So what tapping
does, even though it
appears to look like we're
stating the negative,
just remember that you're being
really mindful and present
in actually acknowledging
what's happening for you.
Now, for the first time,
people that come to tapping
will often find they've
never done that before.
They're so used to trying
to change their mind or just
layer over the top some
positive affirmation.
But underneath what is
there is perhaps still
the distressed feeling
or even a belief
that matches, that
they're actually
used to soldiering through
and trying to just think more
positively, when tapping is
a tool that could actually
clear that out for you and then
allow the positive to come in.
So sometimes, people
do ask, does it
matter what hand
I use when I tap?
And the answer is no.
Most people will tend to tap
with their dominant hand.
And that's perfectly OK.
With children, we say,
use your waving hand.
So the hand that you wave with.
But no, it doesn't matter.
Can you tap with both hands?
So you may well see, if you
were to do a Google of tapping,
that sometimes, people tap
with both hands, both sides
of the face.
Of course, that's
perfectly OK as well.
Does it speed up?
Because, sometimes,
that question pops up.
If I tap with both,
will it make it faster?
Not that we know of.
So the answer there really
is not that we know of.
You can actually do things like
cross-over tapping, as well.
So you can tap on
the opposite side.
So Dr. Carrol Look who's an EFT
master in New York in the USA,
teaches crossover tapping.
It often can help
those two hemispheres
with the message
or a pattern that
might be lifelong that's
being held in the brain
neurologically.
It can help weaken those
links if you actually
tap on the other side
of the face as well.
So there's a range of different
things you can actually tap.
So with children,
we tend not to need
to say the set-up statement and
tap on the side of the hand.
As we have someone coming
to teenage years, of course,
we would teach the full process.
But, really from the age
of 11, 10, and younger,
we can forget about doing that.
Because most of the
time, they come to you
when tapping might
be appropriate,
is they're in the
emotional state.
So they're either cranky,
or angry, or sad or worried.
So they're already in
touch with the feeling.
We use four points
only for children.
We don't tend to need
the eight points.
And it works much
faster for them.
We encourage them to
use both hands just
so both hands are occupied.
So they will tap at the
start of the eyebrow and just
say their worry
or whatever it is.
So it could be, I feel angry.
The next point for
children is under the eyes.
So I feel angry.
The next point for children is
to do closed fist and Tarzan.
So on both collarbone
points, and they
could alternate, so Tarzan.
And the next one is open
hands, hug yourself.
So we're still getting the
underarm point that adults use.
But they're hugging themselves.
So start of the eyebrow, under
the eye, Tarzan, hug yourself.
For young children,
the number out of 10,
that subjective units
of distress rating
that we talk about, tends not
to make a lot of sense to them.
Older children understand that.
But they'll use their
hands to show you.
So how big is this worry?
It's this big.
And then, as we
do each round, we
might, how big is the worry now?
It's this big.
So eventually, their worry
comes down to, there's no worry.
And most of the time,
by they get to that,
they're either
laughing, yawning,
and skipping out the door.
And you know, my
work is done here.
We always encourage people
to obviously self apply it
to themselves.
So if you need to do
it, you're finding
yourself kind of having
an increase in your stress
or whatever.
You might be in a work
meeting or a situation
where perhaps you don't
want to actively, openly tap
because that will just draw
more attention to what's
happening, is, there are
discrete ways of tapping.
So it's probably really useful
for us to talk about these.
Because we do teach them,
if, in a public place, you do
want to calm yourself
down, but you don't really
want to have people notice you.
So I'll give you
two different ways
that you can actually do that.
So one is to actually what
we call touch and breathe
where, it is discrete, and
really, nobody actually
notices, that we still
activate the pressure
point by touching it, and
maybe with a couple of fingers.
But as we sort of rub
there, and most people
would be quite used to rubbing a
temple, if they had a headache,
is, as you, in your own mind,
touch, and rub, and take
a breath, you
would just focus in
on what the distress was
that was happening for you.
And really, nobody notices.
So you could actually
even skip a point or two
or just sort of sit
with your hands.
So it's not an active tapping.
But it's activating
the point by touch.
So touch and breathe
and just thinking
inside your own mind
of what's happening
will still actually
have that effect
of reducing the distress.
Now, it may not make you
that aware of what else
is happening around you
at that moment if somebody
spoke to you.
But, certainly if you're
a public transport,
or in a public place
where you didn't really
want to be noticed, it's
absolutely the best way
to do it.
And we teach teenagers
to do that as well.
The other way that we teach--
and it used to be part
of the original
recipe of tapping--
is to actually teach
the fingernail points.
So in the original,
longer process of EFT,
when it first originated,
there are pressure points
on each side of the nail bed.
So on each side of the nail bed.
And anyone that is a
nail biter will actually
tell you that biting
their nails reduces
whatever anxiety
or distress they're
in at the moment, which is why
they tend to bite their nails.
So here's the alternative to
nail biting, as well as being
able to tap discreetly, is
to squeeze the nail beds
on each side of the finger.
So you can use--
and you can do this with
your hands in your lap.
Again, what you need to do
is keep the mind engaged,
so whatever is happening.
So say, in the moment, you're
feeling a bit overwhelmed.
You would sit with your hands
in your lap and squeeze.
And you can do both hands.
Squeeze each side
of the nail bed.
So those finger points
can be done in the lap
and discretely out
in public places,
and so can touch, and
hold, and breathe.
As long as, again,
you keep your mind
active with what it is
that you're focusing on,
you'll get a reduction.